# synopsys-2021

## Using Machine Learning to Optimize Drug Discovery and Development to Counter Viral Proteins

Watch the Youtube demo [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6nBseV1RIic&ab_channel=AnirudhVenkatraman).

Drug discovery is traditionally an expensive, time-consuming process. My goal was to leverage deep learning techniques to develop machine learning models  to systematically generate new compounds and estimate their binding affinity for various proteins.

For the project’s first phase, I trained a recurrent neural network training on 100,000 drug-like molecules and generating ~2000 unique and valid molecules, verified with Python’s rdkit library. In phase two, I built a convolutional neural network, training on the BindingDB dataset, to determine how well drugs interact with target proteins. 

The model selected the best 500 drugs based on their IC50 value (drug quantity necessary to suppress protein’s function by 50%). Subsequently I ran a differential evolution algorithm to tweak each molecule to minimize its IC50, maximizing its effectiveness against the given protein. 

For phase one, the RNN trained for over 200 epochs to 98% validation accuracy and predicted valid molecules 62% of the time. For phase two, the CNN trained for over 200 epochs to 0.57 r2score, and predicted the correct IC-50 score to within 50% of its actual value.

Testing my entire algorithm to predict a drug which binds most effectively to SYK Kinase, PI4KA (protein secreted by Hepatitis C), Histone deacetylase 1, and Glutaminase kidney isoform, I found the four drugs generated by my model’s predictions were all below 25 nanometers for IC50.

My prototype was a relative success and shows promise. This project is unique as it integrates both discovery and development into a standalone, well-defined algorithm. 

